Parsito
Version 1.1.0

= Introduction =[introduction]

%!include: manual_about.t2t


= Online =[online]

%!include: manual_online.t2t


= Release =[release]

== Download ==[download]

Parsito releases are available on [GitHub http://github.com/ufal/parsito], either as
a pre-compiled binary package, or source code only. The binary package contains Linux,
Windows and OS X binaries, Java bindings binary, C# bindings binary, and source
code of Parsito and all language bindings). While the binary
packages do not contain compiled Python or Perl bindings, packages for those
languages are available in standard package repositories, i.e. on PyPI and CPAN.

- [Latest release http://github.com/ufal/parsito/releases/latest]
- [All releases http://github.com/ufal/parsito/releases], [Changelog https://github.com/ufal/parsito/blob/master/CHANGES]


=== Language Models ===[language_models]

To use Parsito, a language model is needed. The language models are available
from [LINDAT/CLARIN http://www.lindat.cz] infrastructure and described further
in the
%web% [Parsito User's Manual parsito/users-manual].
%manual% [Parsito User's Manual #users_manual].
Currently the following language models are available:

- Universal Dependencies 1.2 Models: [parsito-ud1.2-151120 http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-1573] ([documentation http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/parsito/users-manual#universal_dependencies_12_models])


== License ==[license]

Parsito is an open-source project and is freely available for non-commercial
purposes. The library is distributed under
[Mozilla Public License 2.0 http://www.mozilla.org/MPL/2.0/] and the associated models and data
under [CC BY-NC-SA http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/], although
for some models the original data used to create the model may impose
additional licensing conditions.

If you use this tool for scientific work, please give credit to us by
referencing [Straka et al. 2015 #bibtex_for_referencing] and
[Parsito website http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/parsito].

== Platforms and Requirements ==[platforms_and_requirements]

Parsito is available as a standalone tool and as a library for Linux/Windows/OS
X. It does not require any additional libraries. As any supervised machine
learning tool, it needs trained linguistic models to perform dependency
parsing.


= Parsito Installation =[instalation]

%web% [Parsito Installation on separate page. parsito/install]
%manual% %!include: manual_install.t2t


= Parsito User's Manual =[users_manual]

%web% [Parsito User's Manual on separate page. parsito/users-manual]
%manual% %!include: manual_user.t2t


= Parsito API Reference =[api_reference]

%web% [Parsito API Reference on separate page. parsito/api-reference]
%manual% %!include: manual_api_reference.t2t


= Contact =[contact]

Authors:
- [Milan Straka http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/milan-straka], straka@ufal.mff.cuni.cz


[Parsito website http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/parsito].

[Parsito LINDAT/CLARIN entry http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-1584].


= Acknowledgements =[parsito_acknowledgements]

This work has been using language resources developed and/or stored and/or distributed by the LINDAT/CLARIN project of the Ministry of Education of the Czech Republic (project //LM2010013//).

%web% Acknowledgements for individual language models are listed in [Parsito User's Manual page parsito/users-manual].
%manual% Acknowledgements for individual language models are listed in [Parsito User's Manual #users_manual].


== Publications ==[publications]

- (Straka et al. 2015) Straka Milan, Hajič Jan, Straková Jana and Hajič Jan jr. //Parsing Universal Dependency Treebanks using Neural Networks and Search-Based Oracle.// In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories ({TLT\,14}), December 2015.
-

== Bibtex for Referencing ==[bibtex_for_referencing]

```
@InProceedings{udparsing:2015,
  author    = {Straka, Milan and Haji\v{c}, Jan and Strakov\'{a}, Jana and Haji\v{c} jr., Jan},
  title     = {Parsing Universal Dependency Treebanks using Neural Networks and Search-Based Oracle},
  booktitle = {Proceedings of Fourteenth International Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories ({TLT\,14})},
  month     = {December},
  year      = {2015},
}
```

== Permanent Identifier ==[permanent_identifier]

If you prefer to reference Parsito by a permanent identifier (PID),
you can use ``http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-1584``.
